Big n (#284)
GSK-Biostatistics/tfrmt: vignettes/big_ns.Rmd

---
title: "Big N's"
output: rmarkdown::html_vignette
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{Big N's}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
---

```{r, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  collapse = TRUE,
  comment = "#>"
)
```

```{r setup, message = FALSE, warning = FALSE}
library(tfrmt)
library(tibble)
library(dplyr)
```

> Adding "Big N's" aka subject totals to columns. Is a very common and nessicary part of building tables for cinical trials. {tfrmt} allows you to do this by using a `big_n_structure` to specify which values in the ARD should be added to the columns and how they should be formatted. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Displaying subject totals ("Big N's") at the top of a table is a very common and necessary part of building tables for clinical trials. {tfrmt} allows you to do this via the `big_n` argument, which allows you to use a `big_n_structure` object to specify which values in the ARD should be added to the columns and how they should be formatted. 
```

> To dynamically add big N's to column labels first the information needs to be in the ARD. For a simple example let's take a small demographics table that just has Age ad Sex for Placebo, Treatment and Total. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To dynamically add big N's to column labels, the information needs to be included in the ARD. As a simple example, let's take a small demographics table that just has Age and Sex for Placebo, Treatment and Total. 
```

```{r}

data <- tibble(Group = rep(c("Age (y)", "Sex", "Age (y)", "Sex"), c(3, 3, 6,12)),
               Label = rep(c("n", "Mean (SD)", "Male","Female"), c(6, 6,6,6)),
               Column = rep(c("Placebo", "Treatment", "Total"), times = 8),
               Param = rep(c("n", "mean", "sd", "n", "pct", "n", "pct"),  c(6, 3, 3, 3,3,3,3)),
               Value = c(15,13,28,14,13,27,73.56, 74.231,71.84,9.347,7.234,8.293,8,7,15,8/14,7/13,15/27,6,6,12,6/14,6/13,12/27
               )
) %>%
  # Note because tfrmt only does rounding we will need to have the percents multiplied by 100
  mutate(Value = case_when(Param == "pct" ~ Value * 100,
                           TRUE ~ Value),
         ord1 = if_else(Group == "Age (y)", 1, 2),
         ord2 = if_else(Label == "n", 1, 2))
data
```

> In this study we have 30 subjects per Arm, for a total of 60 subjects. To make the N's go to the right place we need to ensure the values in the `Column` column match the rest of the data. Then we can combine this information with teh data above to make the full ARD for this table.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this study we have 30 subjects per treatment arm for a total of 60 subjects. Because the ARD is 1 row per unique value, our Ns will contribute 3 rows to the ARD. To make the N's go to the right place, we need to supply information about the `column` column values. The `column` column values should map to those already available in the ARD. Then we can combine this information with the data above to make the full ARD for this table.  
```

```{r}
big_ns <- tibble(Column = c("Placebo", "Treatment", "Total"),
                 Param = "bigN",
                 Value = c(30,30,60))

data <- bind_rows(data, big_ns)
```

> Now we can make our `tfrmt` as normal, but this time we are going to add a `big_n_structure` to `big_n`. Here we will specify that values with the parameter of `"bigN"` should be in the column labels and they should be formatted as `"N = XX"` and on a seperate line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can make our `tfrmt` as normal, but this time we are going to add a `big_n_structure` to `big_n`. Here we will specify that values with the parameter of `"bigN"` should be appended to the column labels and they should be formatted as `"N = XX"` and on a separate line.
```

```{r}
tfrmt(
  group = Group,
  label = Label,
  column = Column,
  value = Value,
  param = Param,
  sorting_cols = c(ord1, ord2),
  body_plan = body_plan(
    frmt_structure(group_val = ".default",
                   label_val = ".default",
                   frmt_combine("{n} {pct}",
                                n = frmt("X"),
                                pct = frmt("(xx.x%)", missing = " ")
                   )
    ),
    frmt_structure(group_val = "Age (y)", label_val = "Mean (SD)",
                   frmt_combine("{mean} ({sd})",
                                mean = frmt("XX.X"),
                                sd = frmt("x.xx")
                   )
    ),
    frmt_structure(group_val = ".default", label_val = "n", frmt("xx"))
  ),
  col_plan = col_plan(everything(), -starts_with("ord"), "Total"),
  row_grp_plan = row_grp_plan(
    row_grp_structure(group_val = ".default", element_block(post_space = " "))
  ),

>   big_n = big_n_structure(param = "bigN", n_frmt = frmt("\nN = xx"))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  big_n = big_n_structure(param_val = "bigN", n_frmt = frmt("\nN = xx"))
```

) %>% 
  print_to_gt(data)
```

> This will work no matter how complicated the table, but column names must always match in the ARD. For tables with spanning columns, column information up to the point where you want the big N to go. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No matter how complicated the table, this feature will work as long as the ARD is set up appropriately with the correct `column` column values on the big N rows. For tables with spanning columns (i.e. multiple `column` columns), the big N will be appended to the lowest level `column` column value that is supplied (based on the order of the column variables supplied to the `tfrmt`).
```

>  Let's look at this table, which has 3 layers of column spanning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Let's look at this table, which has 3 layers of column spanning:
```

    "g1", "rowlabel2",  "column cols", "cols 1,2", "col1"  ,  "value",    2,
    "g1", "rowlabel2",  "column cols", "cols 1,2", "col2"  ,  "value",    2,
    "g1", "rowlabel2",             NA,        NA , "mycol3",  "value",    2,
    "g1", "rowlabel2",  "column cols", "col 4"   , "col4"  ,  "value",    2,
    "g1", "rowlabel2",             NA,         NA, "mycol5",  "value",    2,
    "g2", "rowlabel3",  "column cols", "cols 1,2", "col1"  ,  "value",    3,
    "g2", "rowlabel3",  "column cols", "cols 1,2", "col2"  ,  "value",    3,
    "g2", "rowlabel3",             NA,         NA, "mycol3",  "value",    3,
    "g2", "rowlabel3",  "column cols", "col 4"   , "col4"  ,  "value",    3,
    "g2", "rowlabel3",             NA,         NA, "mycol5",  "value",    3,
  )

spanning_tfrmt<- tfrmt(
    group = group,
    label = label,
    param = parm,
    values = val,
    column = c(span2, span1, my_col),
    body_plan = body_plan(
      frmt_structure(group_val = ".default", label_val = ".default", frmt("x"))
    ),
    col_plan = col_plan(
      group,
      label,
      starts_with("col")
    )
  )

print_to_gt(spanning_tfrmt, data)
```
 

>  If we just wanted to put the big N on the highest "column cols" we would need to add a row to the ARD where `span2` equals `"column cols"` and all other column columns are missing. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 If we just wanted to put the big N on the highest "column cols" we would need to add a row to the ARD where `span2` equals `"column cols"` and all other `column` columns are missing. 
```

```{r}
with_big_n_data <- tribble(
  ~group,     ~label,        ~span2,  ~span1,     ~my_col,    ~parm,   ~val,
      NA,        NA,  "column cols",     NA,       NA  ,  "bigN",    18,
) %>% 
  bind_rows(data)

#Now we can add the big_n to the tfrmt from before 
n_span_tfrmt <- spanning_tfrmt %>% 

>   tfrmt(big_n = big_n_structure(param = "bigN", n_frmt = frmt(" N = xx"))) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  tfrmt(big_n = big_n_structure(param_val = "bigN", n_frmt = frmt(" N = xx"))) 
```

print_to_gt(n_span_tfrmt, .data = with_big_n_data)
```
 

>  If we also wanted big N's on `col 1,2`, `col4`, and `mycol3`. So we will need Add 3 more rows to our ARD. One that goes down to teh `span1` level of specificity and two that go all the way down to `my_col` level of specificity. (Note: because we are keeping the `parm` values the same we can use the same tfrmt)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 If we also want big N's on `col 1,2`, `col4`, and `mycol3`, we will need Add 3 more rows to our ARD. One that goes down to the `span1` level of specificity and two that go all the way down to `my_col` level of specificity. (Note: because we are keeping the `parm` values the same we can use the same tfrmt)
```

```{r}
with_more_big_n_data <- tribble(
  ~group,     ~label,        ~span2,  ~span1,     ~my_col,    ~parm,   ~val,
    NA,         NA,  "column cols",  "cols 1,2",   NA  ,      "bigN",    12,
    NA,         NA,  "column cols",  "col 4"   ,   "col4"  ,  "bigN",    6,
    NA,         NA,             NA,          NA,   "mycol3",  "bigN",    6
) %>% 
  bind_rows(with_big_n_data)

print_to_gt(n_span_tfrmt, .data = with_more_big_n_data)
```
 

> As a final note, if column names get changed in the `col_plan`, it shouldn't effect the ARD. The column names for the big N's should match the ARD column names not any future names. But, if names do get updated the big N's will be uneffected. 

Reviewer: this reads a little confusing to me as written. Did you mean that the col_plan does not change the ARD?

Author: Well yes and no.... basic if you rename a column in a col plan you shouldn't have a your big N's like 
```{r}
tribble(
~column, ~param, ~val,
"New Name", "big N", 10
)
```

```{r}
n_span_tfrmt %>% 
  tfrmt(col_plan = col_plan(
      group,
      label,
      starts_with("col"),
      new_col_3 = mycol3,
      -mycol5
    )) %>% 
  print_to_gt(.data = with_more_big_n_data)

```

> `big_n_structure`s provide a straight forward way of adding big N's from the ARD into the column labels. Allowing for big N's at any level of column spanning depending on how it is paramterized in the ARD. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`big_n_structure`s provide a straightforward way of adding big N's from the ARD into the column labels. The functionality allows for big N's at any level of column spanning depending on how it is parameterized in the ARD. 
```
